let's talk about the future of poverty
[Music]
have you heard that phrase even once
from joe biden
bernie sanders donald trump or anyone
else the future of
poverty the poor you will have with you
always it's an issue we
think about less and less because we
rely
on minimum wage more and more
right and it's not just that we rely on
minimum wage
pragmatically right we rely on it
ideologically
too right minimum wage represents a
tremendously appealing
ideal for our society minimum wage
presents to us the ideal
that you don't have to give a tip to the
doorman
who opens and closes the door for you
when you exit your apartment
because he's making enough he's making
enough money
to have a decent quality of life no
matter how humble his job might be
it's the ideal that you know amazon.com
a huge company like this
amazon they don't have to worry about
the guys who work in their warehouse
stealing from them because they know
these guys are being paid enough
whether it's ten dollars an hour or
fifteen dollars an hour that
they are earning a decent wage to have a
decent quality of life
that at the hospital they shouldn't have
to fear
the janitors the people who sweep the
floor take out the garbage they
shouldn't have to fear the janitors
and the people who do the laundry
stealing from the patients
stealing medication from the doctors to
sell on the black market
because they are being paid enough many
of the fundamental
tensions in our society that you could
read in
novels from the 19th century not that
long ago
disappeared because of minimum wage
but we also stopped thinking
about the future of poverty right now i
was raised with a very powerful
misconception i don't know if you grew
up this also i was raised with the
pyramidal
diagram of our society a triangle really
not
not so much a three-dimensional pyramid
to be perfectly honest the idea
that there's a small social class
of the wealthy of the elite at the top
of the pyramid and that
their wealth comes from oppressing the
people at the bottom
and that the larger the number of those
poor people at the bottom
and the more oppressed they are and the
less they're paid then the wealthier the
people
at the top will be that there's a
reciprocal relationship between these
things that
the riches of the richest people among
us
really are a consequence
of the poverty of the poor and that from
the perspective of captains of industry
the perspective of executives who own
huge corporations
and from the perspective of the elite in
power
in our government the more poor the
better
the less they're paid the better the
more oppressed they are the better
because who benefits the people at the
top
of that pyramid now this is false
and it's false in a very simple
arithmetic sense
look at how much a lawyer
or doctor or professor pays in taxes
take the time get a pencil and paper if
you don't believe me
i've gotten lots of fan mail people
don't believe me try to calculate how
much someone pays in taxes in your
country it's easy to google this stuff
how much was some would someone pay an
income tax there and a hundred thousand
dollars a year two hundred thousand
dollars a year three hundred thousand
dollars a year
you may have never thought about it
those people pay a lot in taxes they
really do
now calculate how much a person will pay
in taxes
if they only earn twenty thousand
dollars a year
all right there's a really
important arithmetic sum missing and
that is the cost
to the government in lifetime benefits
the person who only earns twenty
thousand dollars a year and wherever
you're living they probably very little
in taxes or maybe nothing at all
that person still received an education
provided by the taxpayer they probably
receive
more medical benefits provided by the
taxpayer because a lot of rich people
buy things for themselves that they
could get for free from the government
it's a little bit different in every
every country but nevertheless
the the total cost to the government is
higher for for the poor especially the
poor support
and this person even if they're hail and
hearty today they're healthy
eventually they're going to retire
eventually they're going to grow old and
die and then they're going to cost the
government
even more so we do full life cycle
analysis
looking at the life of one poor person
or a hundred poor people
or a thousand or a million what you
realize is the government is not
getting rich by oppressing the poorest
of the poor the parasitic relationship
is between the government and the
wealthy it's the wealthy who provide the
government with money
and the government really does
redistribute that to the poorest of the
poor sometimes just in terms of money
food stamps
money unemployment payouts the dole as
the british sometimes just literally
the government is taking money from the
rich giving money to the poor
but much more profoundly the government
is spending millions and billions of
dollars
to provide services and benefits to the
poor they otherwise
could not enjoy whether that
is running water or electricity
or education or the ability to ride on a
train
or a bus all of these things are
subsidized to an
unbelievable extent every day that we
take advantage of and
take for granted and it's the poorest of
the poor who benefit most and pay the
least
they may in taxes pay nothing at all
when you do the math when you subtract
the benefits from the taxes over a full
life cycle
the poor costs the government money they
don't make the government money and then
what's harder for people to accept
is that for almost every business you
can imagine that exists in the 21st
century in a western democracy
this is also true about the minimum wage
people in a corporation
in a gold mine in a law firm let's
start with the law firm as the simplest
example
okay you think the law firm gets rich by
paying the janitor
as low wage as possible the owner of
this law firm may be
may have a black heart he may be a
terrible person
he may want to pay the janitorial
service
less than minimum wage and that's bad
and i'm morally opposed to that i don't
i don't believe in economic efficiency
it'll cost it's more economically
efficient for him
yes if he can if he can pay the uh the
janitor
as little as possible but the janitor is
not producing
the value the product the output of this
corporation this law firm
in this case right the janitor is kind
of a drag on productivity they need him
they need someone to take out the
garbage and sweep the floor you don't
want the lawyers
wasting their time they need someone to
wash the windows let's say
things like this that are quite time
consuming and people can't just put down
their legal briefs and start
washing them or at least maybe they
could but that's not the way this
particular
law firm is organized it's not organized
not such egalitarian principles
i know a lot of schools in japan that
are organized that way where the schools
say no the teachers are the janitors the
teachers watch the windows
everyone takes terms you can do it you
you can try
but in any case this law firm they may
want to pay
the janitor as little as possible the
productivity
the profitability of the law firm
entirely concerns people
who are paid much much more than minimum
wage and they work together
their productivity comes out of a
cluster the job they do
couldn't be done by just one person
sitting alone at a desk
and it's so profitable it's so
productive
running this law firm that they can
afford to pay their janitor
ten dollars an hour and they can afford
to increase
his wage to fifteen dollars an hour with
no significant
impact on the law firm even if they have
ten janitors
maybe they've janitors and a bunch of
other people that's fine it is a drag
on productivity but that's what's good
for society as a whole that's what
government wants is to have this higher
minimum wage why
we don't want the janitor having to
drive his car
two hours a day because he can't afford
to live in the same neighborhood
where he works or he can't he can't
afford to live within i don't know a
couple kilometers
of where he works he has to travel a
huge disney i remember there was
a restaurant in cambodia where they were
paying a man
i think he was mostly doing the
gardening but he was he was paid at the
lowest level for this
this restaurant so i don't know
gardening and janitorial work
or what have you and i was just in the
room when the owner of the restaurant
who was italian
was talking to his main member of
cambodian staff who translated back and
forth for him
and he was shocked and horrified to find
that this guy was coming and sleeping
in the garden every night and the woman
explained look you pay this guy a wage
you pay him
a salary to mow the lawn and beautiful
flowers all around this restaurant they
really
a very memorable restaurant many ways
you pay this guy to
you know set up the orchids and mow the
lawn and keep this place looking
beautiful right
he comes from a small village you know
he can't afford to live in downtown
phnom penh you can't afford to live in
the big city you can't afford to live
anywhere where you can get back and
forth
you know to work every day okay um there
were really terrible
social conflicts that emerge from paying
people less than a living wage
it makes everyone's life miserable it
makes all society miserable all society
is
on the edge of revolution and violence
all the time just because people aren't
being paid enough by firms that can't
afford to pay them all right
the gold mine mining remains in our
mind's eye
an image of terrible oppression we
imagine that the way gold mining works
is by having one
captain of industry one owner of the
mind exploiting
some enormous number of workers at the
lowest wage possible
right get it as close to slavery as
possible that's what makes a gold mine
profitable nonsense it's not true
all right today in the year 2020 you
look at a gold mine
the people pay minimum wage they will be
janitors they might be people like
security guards right the profitability
and the productivity of the mine
entirely rests
with people who are more highly skilled
harder to replace
right with special technical skills at a
higher level
of the mining form there are people who
are
testing the walls of the mine shaft
for structural integrity there are
safety engineers there are geologists
there are scientists of every kind but
even if you look at the guys who do the
drilling
the guys who operate the the drilling
machine in a mine you are going to find
they are paid
much much more than minimum wage
and the gold mine they can't afford
to pay the janitors the lowest paid
staff they've got
they can't afford to pay them 10 an hour
and they can't afford to pay them 15
an hour and it's good for a whole
society if the government
forces them to pay these people ten
dollars an hour fifteen dollars an hour
but the reality is the owner of the gold
mine is not getting rich by oppressing
those people
or by pushing them down to the lowest
salary possible the reality is
the profitability of the gold mining
firm not so different from that law firm
it's being produced by a cluster of
highly paid people
not necessarily at the top in the middle
and the top of the corporation but
far above the minimum wage right and
those people they couldn't be productive
in that way working alone right one
safety engineer
working alone does not a gold mine make
one geologist
is not worth that much oh but you got
all those people organized and working
together
now you're making billions of dollars
now you have a gold mine
figuratively and literally right and out
of that surplus
out of that amazing productivity and
profitability they can afford to carry
along
those minimum wage people they can
afford to provide the minimum wage
people in their in their company
with a good quality of life with health
care with benefits
with the ability to live somewhere
nearby and not have to
sleep in the garden in front of the gold
mine not to have to be a hobo not to be
pushed down into poverty this way
from the government's perspective in
terms of designing a society
in the government's interest to the
government's advantage
what they would want is an inverse
pyramid they would want a larger number
of wealthy taxpayers
and the fewest number possible of people
subsisting on minimum wage or living in
poverty
below minimum wage now
there's another sort of difficult to pin
down
implicit assumption that the way our
society operates
reflects what is in the government's
best interest as opposed to what's in
the people's best interests or the
interests of the poorest or the poor who
may be quite powerless in your political
system where you're living or
maybe moderately powerless depending
where you live the united states
has a border with a country called
mexico all right and as the minimum wage
in the united states
goes up and up and up the temptation
for any company for any venture is to
relocate their manufacturing
south of the border to mexico or they
can pay all the
employees dramatically less part of my
reason for being this video now
in the last months of the year 2020
is that the prospect of a dramatic
increase in minimum wage in the united
states
is on the docket once again perhaps
uh ignored amongst the election promises
of joe biden
is that he will now raise the minimum
wage united states to
15 per hour 15 u.s dollars per hour in
the year 2020
is quite a lot of money the view
of minimum wage as something
fundamentally
parasitic and not exclusive to the
right-wing fringe
the view of the government forcing
employers
to pay more and the assumptions about
whose interest is that in and what is
the benefit
these will again be called in question
one of the disadvantages of the united
states increasing its minimum wage
is simply that america is adjacent to
mexico the computer
i'm recording this on right now was
manufactured in china
the camera was manufactured in china i
believe this lamp was manufactured in
china
i wonder how many of these books were
published maybe you know pulp and paper
industry is one of the last things we
still do
uh here in canada uh almost everything i
own
is either made in china mexico
bangladesh
we've all lived through this we've all
seen this happen
right the disparity between the minimum
wage
in one country and another has profound
warping effects on the whole economy
and when i read bernie sanders
what i see is that he has no clear
vision
for the future of poverty his only idea
of the future
is to go back to the past it's just to
promise that he's going to revive
the car manufacturing industry in
detroit that america
it's it's really it's like donald
trump's slogan make america great again
like oh yeah
in that post-world war two period in the
1950s and 1960s
america had all this manufacturing power
rule we
we can do it again can we
can we you can have a law firm that
carries even a huge number of janitors
you can have a highly productive firm
like amazon paying a 15
an hour minimum wage no question every
hospital
can afford not just to pay its doctors
and nurses you know a good wage but they
can pay the cleaning staff and the
security guards and the people people
who do the laundry
they all matter too out of the
profitability
of the elite aspects of the company you
can lift up you can carry the the poor
and provide them with a
with a good quality of life even though
they can be replaced even though from a
strictly
economic perspective in terms of
efficiency you could pay someone else
way less to do the laundry
you could take the dirty laundry from
the hospital beds
and send it to mexico and have someone
there clean it and send it back and
you'd probably save money and the whole
hospital would be more profitable
it's true you can outsource everything i
was hearing the other day about
newspapers
that were outsourcing the writing of
articles to the philippines so the
newspaper articles are being written by
journalists in the philippines to be
published in america
this is the problem this is the this is
the riddle of our times
bernie sanders is looking at this and
saying the future of poverty
is the past and that just can't be
right not every industry is going to
operate
like a gold mine not every industry
is going to operate like a law firm okay
mass manufacturing when you get into
industries where there are
more and more people at the bottom of
that pyramid
people sitting at tables taking pieces
of cloth
and stitching them together to make
t-shirts right well that's your whole
that's your whole company
there are just a couple of executives at
the top then a huge number of minimum
wage laborers
manufacturing t-shirts what's the future
of that
in the united states america and what is
the future for the whole world
when we embrace this kind of broken
pyramid system where one part of the
pyramid
that's inverted it's an upside down
pyramid is here
in the united states and canada and then
the other part of the pyramid all the
all the mass
employment mass manufacturing industries
those are in china
and mexico okay this is a rare video in
which i'm not here to give you all the
answers that should be a separate video
not that i don't know the answers that'd
be a separate video i'm really here
trying to emphasize something
that was a misconception in my own youth
because i was raised with this
propaganda i was raised with this uh
misconception quite intentionally it was
inculcated into me
the notion that our whole society is
shaped like a pyramid
because the government itself grows rich
from the oppression of the poor
that there's nothing the executive over
at the gold mine
wants more than to have huge numbers of
employees being paid the absolute
lowest wage possible and that that
rather than the actual goldmining
is where his his fortune comes from
um who's really thinking
about the future of poverty about having
a society
where the rich and poor can live
together
and work together i'll tell you
something in the year 2020
it's not bernie sanders and it's not
donald trump the most dangerous element
of the minimum wage
is maybe that it works too well that it
lets us
just not think about these most
fundamental
questions
[Music]